<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1 plus MathML 2.0//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/MathML2/dtd/xhtml-math11-f.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="LyX 2.0.0rc3" />
<meta http-equiv="Content-type" content="text/html;charset=UTF-8" />
<title>Literature Review</title>

<!-- Text Class Preamble -->
<style type="text/css">
div.toc { 
margin: 2em 0em; 
border-style: solid; 
border-width: 2px 0px; 
padding: 1em 0em; 
}
div.tochead { font-size: x-large; font-weight: bold; }
div.lyxtoc-1 { 
margin: 1em 0em 0em 0em; 
font-size: x-large; 
font-weight: bold; 
}
div.lyxtoc-2 { 
margin: 0em 0em 0em 1em; 
font-size: large; 
font-weight: normal; 
}
div.lyxtoc-3 { margin: 0em 0em 0em 1em; font-size: medium; }
div.lyxtoc-4 { margin: 0em 0em 0em 1em; }
div.lyxtoc-5 { margin: 0em 0em 0em 1em; }
div.lyxtoc-6 { margin: 0em 0em 0em 1em; }
a.tocarrow { 
font-weight: bold; 
text-decoration: none; 
color: #909090; 
}
a.tocarrow:visited { color: #C0C0C0; }
</style>

<!-- Preamble Snippets -->
<style type="text/css">
table { border: 1px solid black; display: inline-block; }
td { border: 1px solid black; padding: 0.5ex; }
</style>
<style type="text/css">
div.bibtexentry { margin-left: 2em; text-indent: -2em; }
span.bibtexlabel:before{ content: "["; }
span.bibtexlabel:after{ content: "] "; }
</style>

<!-- Layout-provided Styles -->
<style type='text/css'>
h1.title {
font-size: x-large;
margin-bottom: 1ex;
text-align: center;

}
div.author {
font-size: large;
margin-top: 1.3ex;
margin-bottom: 0.7ex;
text-align: center;

}
h2.section {
font-weight: bold;
font-size: x-large;
margin-top: 1.3ex;
margin-bottom: 0.7ex;
text-align: left;

}
div.standard {
margin-bottom: 2ex;
}
blockquote.quotation {
margin-top: 0.5ex;
margin-bottom: 0.5ex;
margin-left: 3ex;
margin-right: 3ex;
text-align: left;

}
div.plain_layout {
text-align: left;

}
div.float {
border: 2px solid black;
text-align: center;
}
div.float-caption {
text-align: center;
border: 2px solid black;
padding: 1ex;
margin: 1ex;
}
</style>
</head>
<body>
<h1 class="title"><a id='magicparlabel-3' />
Literature Review</h1>
<div class="author"><a id='magicparlabel-4' />
James Saunders</div>
<h2 class="section"><span class="section_label">1</span> <a id='magicparlabel-5' />
Introduction</h2>
<div class="standard"><a id='magicparlabel-6' />
Ecological sustainability and the sustainability of human development is rapidly becoming a greater concern for the global and local populations and the policy makers tasked with governance (<a href='#Lubchenco1998'>Lubchenco, 1998</a>). </div>
<h2 class="section"><span class="section_label">2</span> <a id='magicparlabel-7' />
Climate change</h2>
<div class="standard"><a id='magicparlabel-8' />
There is a large body of evidence that we are living in the beginning of an era of massive anthropogenic climate change. The increasing human population coupled with the increasing intensity of human consumption and economic activity is placing unprecedented strain on the environment (<a href='#Vitousek1997'>Vitousek et al., 1997</a>). The effects of anthropogenic climate change are wide reaching, affecting all aspects of the environment and human society(<a href='#Lubchenco1998'>Lubchenco, 1998</a>). </div>

<div class="standard"><a id='magicparlabel-9' />
The global population is becoming increasingly vulnerable to effects of both environmental disaster and slow environmental degradation (<a href='#Lubchenco1998'>Lubchenco, 1998</a>). Not only is there a risk of massive loss of human life, but the increasing pressures on resources and land availability make even small environmental changes capable of displacing local populations and threatening food security, leading to economic and political instability. These risks are especially pertinent to Sub-Saharan Africa as well as much of the rest of the developing world(<a href='#Brown01022008'>Brown and Funk, 2008</a>; <a href='#BloemJanuary2010'>Bloem et al., 2010</a>). </div>

<div class="standard"><a id='magicparlabel-10' />
The International Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), a committee convened by the United Nations to investigate climate change, is unequivocal that a large component of the increases in global temperatures are caused anthropogenic green house gases (<a href='#ipcc2007intergovernmental'>IPCC, 2007</a>). Its further states that even if green house gas emissions were to be stabilized global warming and rising sea levels would continue for centuries, stating quite simply:</div>

<blockquote class="quotation"><div class="quotation_item"><a id='magicparlabel-11' />
&ldquo;Anthropogenic warming and sea level rise would continue for centuries due to the time scales associated with climate processes and feedbacks, even if GHG (Green house gas) concentrations were to be stabilised. {WGI 10.4, 10.5, 10.7, SPM}&rdquo; (<a href='#ipcc2007intergovernmental'>IPCC, 2007</a>)</div>
</blockquote>
<div class="standard"><a id='magicparlabel-12' />
Predictions about climate change are heavily contingent on the assumptions made about future human activity. Because of this the IPCC has devloped a number of possible scenarios in the <em>Special Report on Emissions Scenarios (<a href='#IPCC2000'>IPCC, 2000</a>)</em> which were then updated in (<a href='#ipcc2007intergovernmental'>IPCC, 2007</a>). Forty scenarios were developed and grouped in to 4 scenario families, that are representative the range of predicted possible futures <em>(<a href='#IPCC2000'>IPCC, 2000</a>).</em> These scenario families, listed in a rough order of severity, are B1, B2, A1, A2 and are divided based on the global integration of nations and the focus of policy. Table <a href="#tab_SRES_Scenarios">1</a> shows the four different scenarios. Climate change is going to happen, in fact it is already happening (<a href='#ipcc2007intergovernmental'>IPCC, 2007</a>).</div>

<div class="standard"><a id='magicparlabel-13' />
</div>
<div class='float float-table'><div class="plain_layout" style='text-align: center;'><a id='magicparlabel-17' />



<table><tbody><tr><td align='center' valign='top'><div class="plain_layout"><a id='magicparlabel-53' />
</div>
</td>

<td align='center' valign='top' colspan='2'><div class="plain_layout"><a id='magicparlabel-56' />
Policy Focus</div>
</td>
</tr>
<tr><td align='center' valign='top'><div class="plain_layout"><a id='magicparlabel-62' />
</div>
</td>

<td align='center' valign='top'><div class="plain_layout"><a id='magicparlabel-65' />
Economic</div>
</td>

<td align='center' valign='top'><div class="plain_layout"><a id='magicparlabel-68' />
Environmental</div>
</td>
</tr>
<tr><td align='center' valign='top'><div class="plain_layout"><a id='magicparlabel-71' />
Globalisation</div>
</td>

<td align='center' valign='top'><div class="plain_layout"><a id='magicparlabel-74' />
<em>A1</em> (1.4 - 6.4 °C)</div>
</td>

<td align='center' valign='top'><div class="plain_layout"><a id='magicparlabel-77' />
<em>B1</em> (1.1 - 2.9 °C)</div>
</td>
</tr>
<tr><td align='center' valign='top'><div class="plain_layout"><a id='magicparlabel-80' />
Regionalisation</div>
</td>

<td align='center' valign='top'><div class="plain_layout"><a id='magicparlabel-83' />
<em>A2</em> (2.0 - 5.4 °C)</div>
</td>

<td align='center' valign='top'><div class="plain_layout"><a id='magicparlabel-86' />
<em>B2</em> (1.4 - 3.8 °C)</div>
</td>
</tr></tbody>
</table>
</div>

<div class="plain_layout"><a id='magicparlabel-87' />
<div class='float-caption float-caption-table'>Table 1:<div class="plain_layout"><a id='magicparlabel-91' />
<a id="tab_SRES_Scenarios" />
SRES Scenarios showing projected global average surface warming until 2100. (<a href='#ipcc2007intergovernmental'>IPCC, 2007</a>)</div>
</div></div>
</div>

<h2 class="section"><span class="section_label">3</span> <a id='magicparlabel-92' />
Resource Shortages</h2>
<div class="standard"><a id='magicparlabel-93' />
Global biodiversity is being increasingly threatened by mass extinctions of species caused by the compounding effects of climate change and the habitat destruction caused by expanding human activities (<a href='#thomas2004extinction'>Thomas et al., 2004</a>). </div>
<h2 class="section"><span class="section_label">4</span> <a id='magicparlabel-94' />
Outline</h2>
<div class="standard"><a id='magicparlabel-95' />
The state of the environment and the impact of humans.</div>

<div class="standard"><a id='magicparlabel-96' />
(<a href='#Lubchenco1998'>Lubchenco, 1998</a>)</div>

<div class="standard"><a id='magicparlabel-97' />
(<a href='#Vitousek1997'>Vitousek et al., 1997</a>)</div>

<div class="standard"><a id='magicparlabel-98' />
(High certainty that changes are anthropogenic, scenarios)</div>

<div class="standard"><a id='magicparlabel-99' />
The Social-Ecological system</div>

<div class="standard"><a id='magicparlabel-100' />
(<a href='#Peter2010'>Peter, 2010</a>)</div>

<div class="standard"><a id='magicparlabel-101' />
Social Ecological systems as Complex adaptive systems</div>

<div class="standard"><a id='magicparlabel-102' />
(<a href='#Cowan1994'>Cowan et al., 1994</a>; <a href='#Levin2006'>Levin, 2006</a>), (<a href='#Wu20021'>Wu and Marceau, 2002</a>) </div>

<div class="standard"><a id='magicparlabel-103' />
(complexity theory) (<a href='#heylighen2006complexity'>Heylighen et al., 2006</a>)</div>

<div class="standard"><a id='magicparlabel-104' />
Interconnectedness</div>

<div class="standard"><a id='magicparlabel-105' />
(<a href='#Folke2005'>Folke et al., 2005</a>) (biofuels example) (<a href='#Runge2007'>Runge and Senauer, 2007</a>)</div>

<div class="standard"><a id='magicparlabel-106' />
Non-linearity,dynamics </div>

<div class="standard"><a id='magicparlabel-107' />
(<a href='#Richardson2003'>Richardson, 2003</a>)</div>

<div class="standard"><a id='magicparlabel-108' />
Uncertainty</div>

<div class="standard"><a id='magicparlabel-109' />
Difficulties in decision making</div>

<div class="standard"><a id='magicparlabel-110' />
(<a href='#malhotra1999knowledge'>Malhotra, 1999</a>) (rates of change and precedent)</div>

<div class="standard"><a id='magicparlabel-111' />
Transdiciplinarity</div>

<div class="standard"><a id='magicparlabel-112' />
(<a href='#Baran2004'>Baran and Jantunen, 2004</a>), (<a href='#Islam2006'>Islam et al., 2006</a>)</div>

<div class="standard"><a id='magicparlabel-113' />
New management techniques and resilience</div>

<div class="standard"><a id='magicparlabel-114' />
Holling (<a href='#Holling1978'>1978</a>), Holling (<a href='#Holling1973'>1973</a>)</div>

<div class="standard"><a id='magicparlabel-115' />
Big Data</div>

<div class="standard"><a id='magicparlabel-116' />
Models and Indicators</div>

<div class="standard"><a id='magicparlabel-117' />
(monitoring) (<a href='#Dietz2003'>Dietz et al., 2003</a>) (indicators)Meadows (<a href='#meadows1998indicators'>1998</a>), (monitoring) (<a href='#malhotra1999knowledge'>Malhotra, 1999</a>)</div>

<div class="standard"><a id='magicparlabel-118' />
Bayesian Networks</div>

<div class="standard"><a id='magicparlabel-119' />
(<a href='#pearl1988probabilistic'>Pearl and Shafer, 1988</a>), (<a href='#Potgieter2004'>Potgieter, 2004</a>)</div>

<div class="standard"><a id='magicparlabel-120' />
Uses of Bayesian networks in Social-ecological modeling</div>

<div class="standard"><a id='magicparlabel-121' />
(<a href='#Baran2004'>Baran and Jantunen, 2004</a>; <a href='#borsuk2004bayesian'>Borsuk et al., 2004</a>)(<a href='#Peter2010'>Peter, 2010</a>)(<a href='#Henriksen20081025'>Henriksen and Barlebo, 2008</a>)</div>

<div class="standard"><a id='magicparlabel-122' />
Problems with BN's as modeling tools</div>

<div class="standard"><a id='magicparlabel-123' />
Michela Catenacci (<a href='#MichelaCatenacci2010'>2010</a>)</div>

<div class="standard"><a id='magicparlabel-124' />
Alternative Models </div>

<div class="standard"><a id='magicparlabel-125' />
SDE's</div>

<div class="standard"><a id='magicparlabel-126' />
Dynamical Systems models</div>

<div class="standard"><a id='magicparlabel-127' />
Dynamic Bayesian networks</div>

<div class="standard"><a id='magicparlabel-128' />
(BNT guy)</div>

<div class="standard"><a id='magicparlabel-129' />
Other BN types (Continuous guassian, continuous time,irregular time)</div>

<div class="standard"><a id='magicparlabel-130' />
Uses of dynamic Bayesian networks in Social-ecological modeling</div>

<div class="standard"><a id='magicparlabel-131' />
Michela Catenacci (<a href='#MichelaCatenacci2010'>2010</a>) Johnson et al. (<a href='#johnson2010modelling'>2010</a>)</div>

<div class="standard"><a id='magicparlabel-132' />
<h2 class='bibtex'>References</h2><div class='bibtex'><div class='bibtexentry'><a id='Baran2004' />
<span class='bibtexlabel'>Baran and Jantunen 2004</span><span class='bibtexinfo'>Eric Baran and Teemu Jantunen, "Stakeholder Consultation For Bayesian Decision Support Systems In Environmental Management", in <i>Regional Conference on Ecological and Environmental Modeling</i> (, 2004).</span></div>
<div class='bibtexentry'><a id='BloemJanuary2010' />
<span class='bibtexlabel'>Bloem et al. 2010</span><span class='bibtexinfo'>Bloem, Martin W. and Semba, Richard D. and Kraemer, Klaus, "Castel Gandolfo Workshop: An Introduction to the Impact of Climate Change, the Economic Crisis, and the Increase in the Food Prices on Malnutrition", <i>The Journal of Nutrition</i>  140, 1 (2010), pp. 132S-135S.</span></div>
<div class='bibtexentry'><a id='borsuk2004bayesian' />
<span class='bibtexlabel'>Borsuk et al. 2004</span><span class='bibtexinfo'>Borsuk, M.E. and Stow, C.A. and Reckhow, K.H., "A Bayesian network of eutrophication models for synthesis, prediction, and uncertainty analysis", <i>Ecological Modelling</i>  173, 2-3 (2004), pp. 219--239.</span></div>
<div class='bibtexentry'><a id='Brown01022008' />
<span class='bibtexlabel'>Brown and Funk 2008</span><span class='bibtexinfo'>Brown, Molly E. and Funk, Christopher C., "Food Security Under Climate Change", <i>Science</i>  319, 5863 (2008), pp. 580-581.</span></div>
<div class='bibtexentry'><a id='Cowan1994' />
<span class='bibtexlabel'>Cowan et al. 1994</span><span class='bibtexinfo'>G.A. Cowan and D. Pines and D. Meltzer, <i>Complexity: Metaphors, Models, and Reality</i> (Perseus Books, 1994).</span></div>
<div class='bibtexentry'><a id='Dietz2003' />
<span class='bibtexlabel'>Dietz et al. 2003</span><span class='bibtexinfo'>Thomas Dietz and Elinor Ostrom and Paul Stern, "The Struggle to Govern the Commons", <i>Science</i>  302 (2003), pp. 1907 - 1912.</span></div>
<div class='bibtexentry'><a id='Folke2005' />
<span class='bibtexlabel'>Folke et al. 2005</span><span class='bibtexinfo'>C. Folke and T. Hahn and P. Olsson and J. Norberg, "Adaptive governance of social-ecological systems", <i>Annual Review of Environment and Resources</i>  30 (2005), pp. 441-473.</span></div>
<div class='bibtexentry'><a id='Henriksen20081025' />
<span class='bibtexlabel'>Henriksen and Barlebo 2008</span><span class='bibtexinfo'>Hans JÃžrgen Henriksen and Heidi Christiansen Barlebo, "Reflections on the use of Bayesian belief networks for adaptive management", <i>Journal of Environmental Management</i>  88, 4 (2008), pp. 1025 - 1036.</span></div>
<div class='bibtexentry'><a id='heylighen2006complexity' />
<span class='bibtexlabel'>Heylighen et al. 2006</span><span class='bibtexinfo'>Heylighen, F. and Cilliers, P. and Gershenson, C., "Complexity and philosophy", <i>Arxiv preprint cs/0604072</i>  (2006).</span></div>
<div class='bibtexentry'><a id='Holling1973' />
<span class='bibtexlabel'>Holling 1973</span><span class='bibtexinfo'>Holling, C. S., "Resilience and stability of ecological systems", <i>Annu Rev Ecol Syst</i>  4 (1973), pp. 1-23.</span></div>
<div class='bibtexentry'><a id='Holling1978' />
<span class='bibtexlabel'>Holling 1978</span><span class='bibtexinfo'>Holling, C. S., <i>Adaptive Environmental Assessment and Management</i> (Wiley, London, 1978).</span></div>
<div class='bibtexentry'><a id='IPCC2000' />
<span class='bibtexlabel'>IPCC 2000</span><span class='bibtexinfo'>IPCC, <i>Special Report on Emmision Scenarios</i> (, 2000).</span></div>
<div class='bibtexentry'><a id='ipcc2007intergovernmental' />
<span class='bibtexlabel'>IPCC 2007</span><span class='bibtexinfo'>IPCC, A.R., "Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change", <i></i>  (2007).</span></div>
<div class='bibtexentry'><a id='Islam2006' />
<span class='bibtexlabel'>Islam et al. 2006</span><span class='bibtexinfo'>Islam, G. and Zyphur, M., J. and Beal, D., J., "Can a whole be greater than the sum of its parts? A Critical Appraisal of Emergence", <i>IBMEC</i>  Working Paper - WPE, Sao Paulo (2006).</span></div>
<div class='bibtexentry'><a id='johnson2010modelling' />
<span class='bibtexlabel'>Johnson et al. 2010</span><span class='bibtexinfo'>Johnson, S. and Mengersen, K. and de Waal, A. and Marnewick, K. and Cilliers, D. and Houser, A.M. and Boast, L., "Modelling cheetah relocation success in southern Africa using an Iterative Bayesian Network Development Cycle", <i>Ecological Modelling</i>  221, 4 (2010), pp. 641--651.</span></div>
<div class='bibtexentry'><a id='Levin2006' />
<span class='bibtexlabel'>Levin 2006</span><span class='bibtexinfo'>Levin, S.A., "Learning to live in a global commons: Socio-economic challenges for a sustainable environment [electronic version]", <i>Ecological Research Special Feature</i>  21 (2006), pp. 328-333.</span></div>
<div class='bibtexentry'><a id='Lubchenco1998' />
<span class='bibtexlabel'>Lubchenco 1998</span><span class='bibtexinfo'>Jane Lubchenco, "Entering the century of the environment: A new social contract for science", <i>Science</i>  279 (1998), pp. 491-497.</span></div>
<div class='bibtexentry'><a id='malhotra1999knowledge' />
<span class='bibtexlabel'>Malhotra 1999</span><span class='bibtexinfo'>Malhotra, Y., "Knowledge management for organizational white waters: An ecological framework", <i>Knowledge Management</i>  2, 1 (1999), pp. 18--21.</span></div>
<div class='bibtexentry'><a id='meadows1998indicators' />
<span class='bibtexlabel'>Meadows 1998</span><span class='bibtexinfo'>Meadows, D., "Indicators and information systems for sustainable development", <i>A report to the Balaton Group</i>  (1998), pp. 1--25.</span></div>
<div class='bibtexentry'><a id='MichelaCatenacci2010' />
<span class='bibtexlabel'>Michela Catenacci 2010</span><span class='bibtexinfo'>Michela Catenacci, Carlo Giupponi, "Potentials and Limits of Bayesian Networks to Deal with Uncertainty in the Assessment of Climate Change Adaptation Policies", <i>Fondazione Eni Enrico Mattei Working Papers</i>  397 (2010).</span></div>
<div class='bibtexentry'><a id='pearl1988probabilistic' />
<span class='bibtexlabel'>Pearl and Shafer 1988</span><span class='bibtexinfo'>Pearl, J. and Shafer, G., <i>Probabilistic reasoning in intelligent systems: networks of plausible inference</i> (Morgan Kaufmann San Mateo, CA, 1988).</span></div>
<div class='bibtexentry'><a id='Peter2010' />
<span class='bibtexlabel'>Peter 2010</span><span class='bibtexinfo'>Camaren Peter, "Bayesian Participatory-Based Decision Analysis: An Evolutionary, Adaptive Formalism for Integrated Analysisof Complex Challenges to Social-Ecological Systems Sustainability" (2010).</span></div>
<div class='bibtexentry'><a id='Potgieter2004' />
<span class='bibtexlabel'>Potgieter 2004</span><span class='bibtexinfo'>Anet Potgieter, "The Engineering of Emergence in Complex Adaptive Systems" (2004).</span></div>
<div class='bibtexentry'><a id='Richardson2003' />
<span class='bibtexlabel'>Richardson 2003</span><span class='bibtexinfo'>Richardson, K.A., "On the limits of bottom-up computer simulation: Towards a nonlinear modelling culture [electronic version]", in <i>Proceedings of the 36th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, IEEE</i> (, 2003).</span></div>
<div class='bibtexentry'><a id='Runge2007' />
<span class='bibtexlabel'>Runge and Senauer 2007</span><span class='bibtexinfo'>C. Ford Runge and Benjamin Senauer, "How Biofuels Could Starve the Poor", <i>Foreign affiars [Electronic Version]</i>  May/June (2007).</span></div>
<div class='bibtexentry'><a id='thomas2004extinction' />
<span class='bibtexlabel'>Thomas et al. 2004</span><span class='bibtexinfo'>Thomas, C.D. and Cameron, A. and Green, R.E. and Bakkenes, M. and Beaumont, L.J. and Collingham, Y.C. and Erasmus, B.F.N. and De Siqueira, M.F. and Grainger, A. and Hannah, L. and others, "Extinction risk from climate change", <i>Nature</i>  427, 6970 (2004), pp. 145--148.</span></div>
<div class='bibtexentry'><a id='Vitousek1997' />
<span class='bibtexlabel'>Vitousek et al. 1997</span><span class='bibtexinfo'>Peter Vitousek and Harold Mooney and Jane Lubchenco and Jerry Melillo, "Human Domination of Earth's Ecosystems", <i>Science</i>  277 (1997), pp. 494-499.</span></div>
<div class='bibtexentry'><a id='Wu20021' />
<span class='bibtexlabel'>Wu and Marceau 2002</span><span class='bibtexinfo'>Jianguo Wu and Danielle Marceau, "Modeling complex ecological systems: an introduction", <i>Ecological Modelling</i>  153, 1-2 (2002), pp. 1 - 6.</span></div>
</div></div>
</body>
</html>
