#LyX 1.6.4 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 345
\begin_document
\begin_header
\textclass article
\use_default_options true
\language american
\inputencoding auto
\font_roman default
\font_sans default
\font_typewriter default
\font_default_family default
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100
\font_tt_scale 100

\graphics default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single
\use_hyperref false
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_amsmath 1
\use_esint 1
\cite_engine basic
\use_bibtopic false
\paperorientation portrait
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation skip
\defskip medskip
\quotes_language english
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\author "" 
\author "" 
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Title
Bringing Bayesian Participatory Decision Analysis to the Web 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Author
James Saunders and Camaren Peter
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
BPDA and the need for it 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
What was made 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
How was it made 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Why things were done 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Context of greater technological developments 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Comparison of other tools 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Future development 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Conclusions
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Presentation of Network Graphs
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The visualisation of the baysian networks is a critical component of the
 Web BPDA system.
 These graphs form the central interface elements of the entire system and
 represent most readily the shared understanding that the BPDA process builds.
 Web BPDA seperates the design of the network from the running of inferences
 over the network.
 This seperation allows for the two different tasks to use visualization
 in the manner that most suits them.
 A trade off between the completeness of the information shown and the clarity
 of the information is neccesarily made.
 However as much visual similarity as possible is maintained between the
 two representations, importantly this consistancy includes the position
 of the nodes relative to each other (the graph layout) and the colours
 of the nodes.
 Visually the graph uses thick lines, and clear simple colours to aid visibility.
 The graphs can be zoomed and panned smoothly.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
The network definition graph
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The network definition graph is concerned with representing the graph using
 the full visual modelling language.
 The goal is to represent the structure of the graph as clearly as possible,
 including the roles of the nodes and edges.
 Different node roles are represented as both different shapes and colours,
 making it very easy to distinguish them when the graph is zoomed out very
 far.
 Different edge roles are represented by different stroke patterns and arrow
 head types.
 Because only structural information is shown in this view many nodes can
 be represented in a compact space.
 This allows the larger global structure and the relationships between different
 variables to be more easily comprehended.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Subsection
The network inference graph
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The network inference graph allows for setting observations and running
 inferences over the network.
 Observations can be set by simply clicking on the observed state, this
 creates a clear visual representation taht an observation has been set.
 When inference in run the probabilities are shown using the classic horizontal
 bar format that is used in many popular BN toolkits as well as a numeric
 value.
 In the inference view the visual modelling language is not used in the
 representation of the nodes and edges (with the exception of node colour).
 This leaves the graph, which must have nessesarilly large nodes, as un-cluttere
d as possible, thus increasing clarity.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Decoupling of bayesian network backends
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Web BPDA can use multiple bayesian network backends to perform inference
 and learning.
 The bayesian network backends are decoupled from any of the other logic
 of Web BPDA.
 The rationale for this is two fold.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Firstly it allows for the bayesian network logic and the web application
 to be implemented in different ways.
 Because the systems are decoupled the design considerations of the two
 systems can be decoupled.
 Consequently the web-application and the bayesian network logic can be
 programmed in different languages using different design patterns.
 Since the nature of the two domains are so different it makes sense that
 descions made for the purposes of the one domain shoudl not affect the
 other.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Secondly it ensures that the project is not committed to a single bayesian
 network implementation.
 At the time of writing there are over 58 different bayesian network packages
 available, of which over 47 are freely available.
 This shows the huge variety of software that is available for use.
 However the various software packages have there own strengths and limitations.
 For example implement different inference algorithms and the different
 algorithms are suited to different purposes, including tradeoffs between
 speed and accuracy.
 It also allows for new advances in the field of bayesian network to be
 easily incorporated into the system.
 From a legal perspective this allows proprietary software to be in circumstance
s where there is suitable no open source candidate that can scale to the
 levels required by very large models.
 
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
